# Project Euler 7 - 10001st Prime

## Problem Description
The problem reads:

> By listing the first six prime numbers 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, and 13, we can see that
> the 6th prime is 13.
>
> What is the 10001st prime number?
>
> [Project Euler Problem 7](https://projecteuler.net/problem=7)

We have an efficient way to obtain a large list of prime numbers, which is
described in {doc}`/prelim/generating-prime-numbers`. That approach generates
all primes lower than a particular number - it doesn't directly generate the
first $n$ primes.

## Trial and error
A simple approach to solving this is to generate all primes to 100 and check if
we have 10001 of them. If not, move on to generating all primes below 1000 and
check again. If we still don't have 10001 primes, move on to generating all
primes below 10000. By repeating this process we will eventually obtain an upper
bound that is large enough to generate more than 10001 primes, at which point we
simply return the 10001st.

After we know what the 10001st prime is, we can optimise this by setting the
upper bound to the 10001st prime plus one.

## Estimating
The guessing approach will work, but it requires repeated changes to our
program, and the optimisation step occurs after we already know the answer. In
one sense, this feels like it occurs in the wrong order.

If we want a relatively efficient approach that doesn't use information from
previous program executions, we will need to make a good estimation of what the
10001st prime will be and use that as the upper bound (assuming the estimate is
always larger).

For $n > 6$ it can be shown that that the nth prime number $p_n$ is bounded
above and below as follows:

$$\begin{aligned}
    &&\log{n}+\log{\log{n}}-1 &< \frac{p_n}{n} < \log{n} + \log\log{n} \\
    \Rightarrow && p_n &< n (\log{n} + \log\log{n})
\end{aligned}$$

Using this estimate, we set our upper bound to be:

$$\begin{aligned}
    u &= \lceil 10001 \cdot (\ln{10001} + \ln\ln{10001})\rceil \\
    &= \lceil 114319.2111 \dots \rceil \\
    &= 114320
\end{aligned}$$

From here we generate all primes up to 114320, and return the 10001st, which is:
104743

## Python Implementation
``` python
def nth_prime_bounds(n: int) -> tuple[int,int]:
    """Estimate the n'th prime number.

    Returns a lower and an upper bound on the value of the nth prime.
    """
    # As n gets larger, the nth prime ~ n * ln(n)
    upper_bound = ceil(n * (log(n) + log(log(n))))
    lower_bound = upper_bound - n
    return (lower_bound, upper_bound)

def nth_prime(n: int) -> int:
    """Calculate the n'th prime number."""
    small_primes = [2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13]
    if n <= 6: return small_primes[n-1]
    
    lower_bound, upper_bound = nth_prime_bounds(n)
    return list(islice(primes(upper_bound), n - 1, n))[0]

def p7(n: int) -> int:
    return nth_prime(n)

print(p7(10001))
```