# Project Euler 12 - Highly Divisible Triangular Number

## Problem Description
The problem reads:

> The sequence of triangle numbers is generated by adding the natural numbers.
> So the $7^\text{th}$ triangle number would be $ 1+2+3+4+5+6+7 = 28$. The first
> ten terms would be:
>
> $$ 1, 3, 6, 10, 15, 21, 28, 36, 45, 55, \dots$$
>
> Let us list the factors of the first seven triangle numbers:
> 
> $$ \begin{aligned}
\mathbf1&: 1 \\
\mathbf3&: 1, 3 \\
\mathbf6&: 1, 2, 3, 6 \\
\mathbf{10}&: 1, 2, 5, 10 \\
\mathbf{15}&: 1, 3, 5, 15 \\
\mathbf{21}&: 1, 3, 7, 21 \\
\mathbf{28}&: 1, 2, 4, 7, 14, 28
\end{aligned} $$
> 
> We can see that $28$ is the first triangle number to have over five divisors.
>
> What is the value of the first triangle number to have over five hundred
> divisors?
> 
> [Project Euler Problem 12](https://projecteuler.net/problem=12)

## Brute Force
A simple brute force approach involves generating the sequence of triangle
numbers and processing them one at a time by checking all lower numbers for
divisibility and counting the divisors.

This approach will eventually find the correct number, $76576500$, but it will
take a long time.

## Use the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic
We can take advantage of the fact that integers greater than one can be uniquely
factored into primes. Consider the number 12:

$$ \begin{aligned}
12 &= 2^2 \cdot 3^1 \\
&= 2 \cdot 2 \cdot 3 \\
\end{aligned} $$

The number 12 has 6 divisors. Here is the list:

$$ \begin{aligned}
1 &= 3^0 \cdot 2^0 \\
2 &= 3^0 \cdot 2^1 \\
4 &= 3^0 \cdot 2^2 \\
3 &= 3^1 \cdot 2^0 \\
6 &= 3^1 \cdot 2^1 \\
12 &= 3^1 \cdot 2^2
\end{aligned} $$

Look closely at the powers of 2 and 3. Each entry on this list contains a 2
raised to a power between 0 and 2, and a 3 raised to a power between 0 and 1.
These upper limits placed on the powers come directly from the factorisation of
12:

$$ \begin{aligned}
12 &= 2^2 \cdot 3^1
\end{aligned} $$

Every integer, $n$, greater than 1 can be uniquely factorised:

$$ \begin{aligned}
n &= p_1^{r_1} \cdot p_2^{r_2} \cdot p_3^{r_3} \cdots p_k^{r_k}\\
&= \prod{p_k^{r_k}}
\end{aligned} $$

where $k$ is the number of unique prime factors of $n$.

For each prime factor $p_s^{r_s}$ we can choose to raise $p_s$ to a power
between $0$ and $r_s$, giving us $(r_s + 1)$ choices. We make this choice for
all of the unique prime factors of $n$, making the total number of divisors of
$n$ equal to the product of the number of choices we can make for each unique
prime factor. Let $\sigma_0(n)$ denote the number of divisors of $n$

$$ \begin{aligned}
\sigma_0(n) &= (r_1+1)\cdot(r_2+1)\cdot(r_3+1)\cdots(r_k+1) \\
&= \prod_{s=1}^k{(r_s + 1)}
\end{aligned} $$

This allows us to transform the problem into finding the prime factors of each
triangle number and counting how many times each prime factor divides into the
triangle number, multiplying the result + 1 as above.

## Python Implementation
``` python
def count_divisors(number: int, prime_numbers: Iterator[int]) -> int:
    divisors = 1
    for prime in prime_numbers:
        factor = prime
        prime_power = 1
        while factor <= number:
            if number % factor == 0:
                factor *= prime
                prime_power += 1
            else: break
        divisors *= prime_power
    return divisors

def p12(divisor_target: int) -> int:
    prime_number_list = list(primes(1000))
    for n in range (1, 2 ** 30):
        triangle_number = n * (n + 1) // 2
        number_of_divisors = count_divisors(triangle_number, prime_number_list)
        if number_of_divisors >= divisor_target:
            return triangle_number

print(p12(500))
```
