# Project Euler 14 - Longest Collatz Sequence

## Problem Description
The problem reads:

> The following iterative sequence is defined for the set of positive integers:
> 
> $$ \begin{aligned}
n &\rightarrow n/2 &&(n \text{ is even}) \\
n &\rightarrow 3n+1 &&(n \text{ is odd})
\end{aligned} $$
> 
> Using the rule above and starting with $13$, we generate the following
> sequence:
>
> $$ \begin{aligned}
13 \rightarrow 40 \rightarrow 20 \rightarrow 10 \rightarrow 5 \rightarrow 16
\rightarrow 8 \rightarrow 4 \rightarrow 2 \rightarrow 1
\end{aligned} $$
>
> It can be seen that this sequence (starting at $13$ and finishing at $1$)
> contains $10$ terms. Although it has not been proved yet (Collatz Problem), it
> is thought that all starting numbers finish at $1$.
>
> Which starting number, under one million, produces the longest chain?
>
> **NOTE:** Once the chain starts the terms are allowed to go above one million.
>
> [Project Euler Problem 14](https://projecteuler.net/problem=14)

## Solution
Mathematically, this solution simply tracks the chain length of every initial
number from $1$ to $999999$, and returns the longest one found. This yields the
correct answer of $837799$.

While this approach is mathematically correct, calculating the full chain for
every initial number is very slow. To accelerate the calculation, every number
that is visited while calculating a chain has its sequence length stored in a
dictionary. This allows a rapid lookup of a chain length if a number is part of
a future chain.

Replacing potentially expensive repeated chain calculations with inexpensive
dictionary look-ups drastically accelerates finding the correct result.

### Example

For initial value $1$, the sequence to reach $1$ is:

$$ 1 $$

The number of steps required to reach $1$ was $0$. This is added to the
dictionary.

$$\begin{array}{|c|c|}
\hline
\text{Initial number} & \text{Collatz sequence length} \\
\hline
1 & 0 \\
\hline
\end{array}$$

For initial value $2$, the sequence to reach $1$ is:

$$ 2 \rightarrow 1 $$

The number of steps required to reach $1$ was $1$. This is added to the
dictionary.

$$\begin{array}{|c|c|}
\hline
\text{Initial number} & \text{Collatz sequence length} \\
\hline
1 & 0 \\
2 & 1 \\
\hline
\end{array}$$

For initial value $3$, the sequence to reach $1$ starts with:

$$ 3 \rightarrow 10 \rightarrow 5 \rightarrow 16 \rightarrow 8 \rightarrow 4
\rightarrow 2 $$

As each number is calculated the dictionary is checked. When $2$ is reached, the
number of steps back to $1$ is found to be $1$. The code can then add that to
the $6$ steps already taken to determine the length of a chain starting with $3$
is $7$. The length of the chain to $1$ is added to the dictionary for every
number that is visited.

$$\begin{array}{|c|c|}
\hline
\text{Initial number} & \text{Collatz sequence length} \\
\hline
1 & 0 \\
2 & 1 \\
3 & 7 \\
4 & 2 \\
5 & 5 \\
8 & 3 \\
10 & 6 \\
16 & 4 \\
\hline
\end{array}$$

Every time the number $3$ is found in a future chain, this one lookup will
determine there are $7$ more steps to $1$ instead of having to calculate all of
those steps.

## Python Implementation
``` python
collatz_lengths = {}

def collatz_length(number: int) -> int:
    """Calculate the collatz sequence length for a number

    All values that are visited while generating the sequence
    will have their sequence length cached. This allows
    for greatly improved performance with multiple use.
    """

    length_if_known = collatz_lengths.get(number)
    if length_if_known is not None: return length_if_known

    visited_numbers = []
    length = 1
    current_value = number
    while current_value > 1:
        if current_value % 2 == 0: current_value //= 2
        else: current_value = 3 * current_value + 1
        
        length_if_known = collatz_lengths.get(current_value)
        if length_if_known is not None:
            length += length_if_known
            current_value = 1
        else:
            visited_numbers.append(current_value)
            length += 1

    collatz_lengths[number] = length
   
    adjusted_length = length
    for visited_number in visited_numbers:
        adjusted_length -= 1
        collatz_lengths[visited_number] = adjusted_length

    return length

def p14(stop: int) -> int:
    number_with_max_collatz_length = 0
    max_collatz_length = 0
    if stop == 1: return 1
    for n in range(1, stop):
        length = collatz_length(n)
        if length > max_collatz_length:
            max_collatz_length = length
            number_with_max_collatz_length = n
    
    return number_with_max_collatz_length
            
print(p14(1000000))
```
